h1. B.A.T.M.A.N. Advanced OpenWrt configuration

This page showcases some basic batman-adv configurations on OpenWrt including wireless & network setups. However, the goal is to provide not more than a starting point. For a full reference of the OpenWrt uci system please visit the official "OpenWrt uci documentation":http://wiki.openwrt.org/doc/uci.

The configuration for the following common example is provided: One AP with a wireless adhoc interface is supposed to run batman-adv (essentially, the setup explained in our [[Quick-start-guide|Quick-start-guide]]). 

h2. Batman-adv 2012.4.0 and older

First, the wifi interface needs to be configured in '/etc/config/wireless':
<pre>
config wifi-device 'radio0'
        option [..]

config wifi-iface 'wmesh'
        option device 'radio0'
        option ifname 'adhoc0'
        option network 'mesh'
        option mode 'adhoc'
        option ssid 'mesh'
        option bssid '02:CA:FE:CA:CA:40'
</pre>

It is assumed you configured the 'wifi-device' depending on your requirements and your hardware. The interesting part is the 'wifi-iface' stanza with its options:

 * 'device' points back to your radio (wifi-device) interface
 * 'ifname' allows you to specifiy an arbitrary name for your adhoc interface (which we are going to re-use later)
 * 'network' points to the corresponding stanza in '/etc/config/network'
 * 'mode' defines the wifi mode (adhoc in our case)
 * 'ssid' and 'bssid' are basic wireless settings you might want to set to your liking

Configure the MTU in '/etc/config/network'
<pre>
config interface 'mesh'
        option ifname 'adhoc0'
        option mtu '1528'
        option proto 'none'
</pre>

The stanza's name 'mesh' as well as the ifname option have to match your wireless configuration.

Batman-adv is configured through its own configuration in '/etc/config/batman-adv':
<pre>
config mesh 'bat0'
        option interfaces 'adhoc0'
        option 'aggregated_ogms'
        option 'ap_isolation' 
        option [..]
</pre>

The 'interfaces' option is the key element here, as it tells batman-adv which interface(s) to run on. All the other options enable / disable / tweak all the batman-adv features you can also access at runtime through batctl.

h2. Batman-adv 2013.0.0 and later

With batman-adv 2013.0.0 the OpenWrt package was converted to integrate with OpenWrt's netifd system. This has some impact on the configuration but not much.

The wireless configuration remains identical:
<pre>
config wifi-device 'radio0'
        option [..]

config wifi-iface 'wmesh'
        option device 'radio0'
        option ifname 'adhoc0'
        option network 'mesh'
        option mode 'adhoc'
        option ssid 'mesh'
        option bssid '02:CA:FE:CA:CA:40'
</pre>

The network configuration now allows to specify batman-adv as protocol and the batman-adv interface name:
<pre>
config interface 'mesh'
        option mtu '1532'
        option proto 'batadv'
        option mesh 'bat0'
</pre>

The batman-adv configuration is somewhat simpler now because it only contains the batman-adv specific options:
<pre>
config mesh 'bat0'
        option 'aggregated_ogms'
        option 'ap_isolation'
        option [..]
</pre>

*Since batman-adv 2014.2.0* VLAN specific options have to be configured in a separated stanza having protocol 'batadv_vlan'.

In this particular section the user has to specify the name of the VLAN interface (that will be automatically created by netifd) and then list all the wanted options.
At the moment the only available option for this section is 'ap_isolation':
<pre>
config interface 'my_bat_vlan1'
	option protocol 'batadv_vlan'
	option ifname 'bat0.1'
	option ap_isolation '1'
</pre>

Any VLAN specific option can still be listed in the batman-adv configuration for 'bat0' and in that case they will affect the behaviour only for the plain mesh interface (i.e. bat0 - the untagged LAN).

h2. Advanced configuration examples

More sophisticated OpenWrt config examples can be found [[Batman-adv-openwrt-config-sophisticated|here]].
