h1. Distributed ARP Table

+This page is a work in progress. Sorry for being uncomplete+

DAT (Distributed ARP Table) is a network-wide "ARP":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arp_protocol cache that helps clients in getting ARP responses in a much more reliable way, in particular in sparse wireless mesh networks. In the latter case, getting a broadcast packet (the ARP request) from the source to the proper destination (the host with the requested IP) would probably require several retransmissions because of the packet loss. DAT aims to improve this mechanism and to increase the ARP dialogue reliability.

h2. The idea

The DAT core mechanism consists in storing the content of all the ARP replies that travel over the network on a specific set of nodes. Given an IP address, the set containing its related ARP entry (IP & MAC Address) is known to every other mesh participant thanks to a distributed hash function. In this way, whenever a client issues an ARP request, the mesh node can intercept and forward it directly to the nodes belonging to the specific set where the corresponding entry is stored. Requests are sent as unicast packets and therefore the probability of losing the packet decreases with respect to the common case.

h2. Enable/Disable DAT

DAT cannot be enabled or disabled at runtime. It is possible to decide whether to include DAT or not at compile time (default to ON). To do so it is possible to customise the corresponding option in the package Makefile or by means of the menuconfig for the in-kernel module.

h2. Inspecting the Local DAT table

Since DAT is a network wide cache, each node stores a little piece of this big table in its own memory. To see what entries the node is currectly storing, it is possible to use the following command:
<pre>
# batctl dat
</pre>

An explanation of the output can be found here.