h1. B.A.T.M.A.N. Advanced Documentation Overview

How to get a mesh network up and running, how to configure the many features of B.A.T.M.A.N. Advanced, and how to shoot down your troubles. 

h2. Getting started

* [[Wiki|B.A.T.M.A.N. Advanced overview]] - information about the Layer 2 version of B.A.T.M.A.N.
* [[building-with-openwrt|Building B.A.T.M.A.N. Advanced with OpenWRT]] - how to download and configure your OpenWRT build environment to compile batman-adv.
* [[quick-start-guide|B.A.T.M.A.N. Advanced quick start guide]] - or: what the hell is bat0 for?
* [[using-batctl|Features of batctl]] - A quick introduction to batctl.
* "batctl online man page":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/manpages/batctl.8.html - read the current batctl man page online
* "Wireless Kernel Tweaking (video)":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/misc/24C3-Wireless_Kernel_Tweaking.mkv - introduction to batman-advanced by Marek and Simon [December 2007] (also available at "google video":http://video.google.de/videoplay?docid=1355876033101731617)

h2. Features

* [[gateways|Gateway support]] - How batman-adv can be used to choose the nearest internet gateway node.
* [[open-mesh:2012-05-13-translation-table-in-a-nutshell|TranslationTable in a nutshell]] -  The inner workings of the non-mesh client integration revealed.
* [[bridge-loop-avoidance|Bridge loop avoidance]] - Document explaining the bridge loop avoidance implemented in batman-adv.
* [[Multi-link-optimize|Multi-Link Optimizations]] - how to optimize traffic by using multiple links
* [[ap-isolation|AP Isolation]] - How to prevent wifi-client to wifi-client communication.
* [[DistributedArpTable|Distributed ARP Table]] - How batman-adv can speed up your mesh experience by caching ARP replies.
* [[open-mesh:2012-09-24-GSoC-2012-Martin-Hundebolls-Final-Report|Fragmentation]] - basic concept behind the layer2 fragmentation (GSoC final report)
* [[NetworkCoding|Network Coding]] - Combine two packets into a single transmission to save air time.
* [[open-mesh:alfred|Alfred]] - Use alfred to send local information or visualize your mesh network

h2. Troubleshooting

* [[Understand-your-batman-adv-network|Available Information]] - Read about the information exported by the module.
* [[troubleshooting|Troubleshooting FAQ]] - What if my batman-adv setup does not behave as expected ?

h2. Developer Information / Advanced Features

* [[tweaking|Tweaking the B.A.T.M.A.N. Advanced behaviour]] - get an overview about the various settings batman-adv offers
* [[uevent|B.A.T.M.A.N. user space events]] - batman-adv's uevent documentation
* [[open-mesh:UsingBatmanGit|Using the batman git repos]] - this page explains how the git repository is structured and how to use it
* [[open-mesh:Emulation|Emulation HowTo]] - how to create an environment to emulate wireless setups using QEMU and VDE
* [[TVLV|TVLV]] - details regarding the TVLV (type-version-length-value) API and defined TVLV containers

h2. Protocol Documentation

* [[open-mesh:BATMANConcept|B.A.T.M.A.N. Concept]] - get an overview about B.A.T.M.A.N.'s main concepts
* [[open-mesh:routing_scenarios|Routing scenarios]] - a collection of routing scenarios a routing protocol should be able to handle
* [[Network-wide-multi-link-optimization|Multi-Link Optimizations]] - Use multiple links in batman-adv for fun and profit (technical documentation)
* [[Client-announcement|Client announcement]] - how batman-adv handles non-mesh clients bridged into the mesh
* [[Client-roaming|Client roaming]] - non-mesh clients moving from one mesh node to the next
* [[TT-Flags|TT Flags]] - explanation for internal flags used by the translation table code
* [[Packet-types|Batman-adv packet types]] - backward compatibility for batman-adv
* [[Compatversion|Compat versions]] - packet versions / formats used by batman-adv
* [[ELP|ELP protocol]] - B.A.T.M.A.N. V ELP protocol specification
* [[Bridge-loop-avoidance-II]] - bridge loop avoidance to allow multiple gateways between LAN and mesh, redesigned
* [[DistributedArpTable-technical|Distributed ARP Table]] - technical details regarding the inner working of the DAT mechanism
* [[Fragmentation-technical|Fragmentation]] - technical details explaining the layer2 fragmentation
* [[NetworkCoding-technical|Network Coding]] - technical details regarding the network coding implementation
* "Batman-adv multicast optimization (video)":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/misc/wbmv4-multicast.avi - how batman-adv optimizes multicast traffic by Linus and Simon [March 2011] 
* "Bisect the batman-adv routing protocol (video)":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/misc/wbmv4-bisect.avi - the bisect tool explained & demonstrated by Marek [March 2011] 
* "Project CATWOMAN - network coding with batman-adv (video)":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/misc/wbmv4-network_coding.avi - introduction into network coding with batman-adv by Martin and Jeppe [March 2011]
* "Random Linear Coding (video)":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/misc/wbmv6-random-linear-network-coding.mp4 - presentation on network coding by Martin [April 2013]