h1. FAQ

Below you can see a list of frequently asked questions and answers. If your question is not listed below, please contact us.  You can contact us via IRC: "#batman channel":http://webchat.freenode.net/?channels=batman on Freenode.org or by sending an e-mail to: "b.a.t.m.a.n@lists.open-mesh.org":mailto:b.a.t.m.a.n@lists.open-mesh.org (only plan-text).

h2. What can B.A.T.M.A.N.? And can't do?

*Q:* What offers batman? And what are the 'limitations'?
*A:* The batman-adv kernel module can only be used to route the packages within a mesh network, it only simulates OSI layer 2 (data link layer). It does that as fast as possible and in a smart way. Just like a switch. 

Batman has no security implemented. Also assigning IP addresses to the node(s) is not Batman's task.
You may want to use underlying security mechanisms, like: IBSS RSN.

h2. Log file doesn't exists in debugfs?

*Q:* The /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/log file doesn't exists?
*A:* You need to compile the batman-adv with logging support. Open the Makefile. 
Change the following line: "CONFIG_BATMAN_ADV_DEBUG" to: 'y'. Finally, re-compile the module.

h2. Batman-adv give an error when loading the module?

*Q:* When I try to load the kernel module, it says: _ERROR: could not insert module batman-adv.ko: Unknown symbol in module_?
*A:* Check dmesg logging output (using dmesg command). If it says 'Unknown symbol crc32c'. First load the libcrc32c module, using: sudo modprobe libcrc32c. Installing the module (sudo make install) will fix this problem as well. As it will check for dependencies using modprobe.

h2. How to setup B.A.T.M.A.N. so it automatically assign IP addresses?

*Q:* How to assign IP addresses automatically?
*A:* You can use for example a DHCP server.

h2. What about assigning IP addresses in a decentralized way?

*Q:* How to assign IP addresses automatically in a decentralized way?
*A:* IPv6 will help you to do this easier by using "Unique local address":http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unique_local_address (ULA). And

h2. What if I want to have a decentralized DNS solution?

*Q:* I like to setup a decentralized mesh network and would like to have a DNS solution. I don't want to use the internet (WWW), but I do want to have a human readable 'domains' names, just like DNS. What are the options?
*A:* Take a look at "KadNode":https://github.com/mwarning/KadNode. _Note:_ This software is still in beta.