h1. Submitting Patches to Linux


We currently submit patches for Linux from our next branch. I try to give a short overview about it using some patches submitted to DaveM.

Following steps must always be done:
* get the linux-integration repository (we assume that the merge/master branch is up to date. The latest -rc1 must always be merged into merge/master, batman-adv/maint and batman-adv/next; The merge in batman-adv/maint and batman-adv/next must be a fast forward merge or somebody did something extremely wrong)
* get the newest patches from next
* merge standalone/next into merge/master
* check for compat code
* check difference with standalone/next
* rebase on top of previous version
* squash/cleanup patches
* check if all versions compile cleanly using sparse (cgcc)
* format patches
* check commit messages author/signed-off-by of patches (Cc: stable@kernel.org for important bugfixes for older kernel)
* Add "batman-adv: " before each commit subject
* check if all patches are checkpatch.pl clean
* submit patches



h2. get the linux-integration repository


<pre>
'-(%25)-> git clone git+ssh://git@open-mesh.org/linux-merge.git
Initialized empty Git repository in /home/batman/linux-merge/.git/
remote: Counting objects: 1544059, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100%25 (252781/252781), done.
....
'-(%25)-> cd linux-merge
</pre>


h2. get the newest patches from next


<pre>
'-(%25)-(merge/master)> git remote update
Fetching origin
remote: Counting objects: 1387, done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100%25 (211/211), done.
remote: Total 823 (delta 651), reused 762 (delta 602)
Receiving objects: 100%25 (823/823), 136.90 KiB | 254 KiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100%25 (651/651), completed with 228 local objects.
From git+ssh://open-mesh.org/marek/linux-merge
   bfa88ea..151b6a5  standalone/master     -> origin/standalone/master
   c9f7cbe..078eb6a  standalone/next       -> origin/standalone/next
</pre>


h2. merge next into linux


<pre>
'-(%25)-(xyz)> git checkout merge/master
Checking out files: 100%25 (32337/32337), done.
Switched to branch 'merge/master'
'-(%25)-(merge/master)> git merge -s subtree origin/standalone/next
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/Makefile
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in net/batman-adv/Makefile
CONFLICT (delete/modify): net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild deleted in HEAD and modified in standalone/next. Version standalone/next of net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild left in tree.
CONFLICT (delete/modify): net/batman-adv/compat.h deleted in HEAD and modified in next. Version next of net/batman-adv/compat.h left in tree.
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/main.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/originator.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/routing.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/send.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/soft-interface.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/translation-table.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/vis.c
Automatic merge failed; fix conflicts and then commit the result.
'-(%25)-(merge/master)> git rm net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild net/batman-adv/compat.h
net/batman-adv/Makefile: needs merge
net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild: needs merge
net/batman-adv/compat.h: needs merge
rm 'net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild'
rm 'net/batman-adv/compat.h'
'-(%25)-(merge/master)> vim net/batman-adv/Makefile
'-(%25)-(merge/master)> git add net/batman-adv/Makefile
'-(%25)-(merge/master)> git commit
[linux f2204f0] Merge remote branch 'origin/standalone/next' into merge/master
</pre>

All changes to the the sysfs-class-net-* files can't be automatically merged because they reside in a different subfolder. As a consequence the new version has to be manually copied from a local git tree to 'Documentation/ABI/testing/'. The README file also requires manually handling: All relevant in-kernel changes have to be merged into 'Documentation/networking/batman-adv.txt' whereas out-of-kernel information has be stripped out.


h2. check for compat code


<pre>
'-(%25)-(merge/master)> git grep compat. net/batman-adv/
</pre>


h2. check difference with next


<pre>
git diff origin/standalone/next: merge/master:net/batman-adv/
</pre>

Here you should see the
* Removed CHANGELOG
* new added Kconfig
* A special Makefile which only contains obj-$(CONFIG_BATMAN_ADV) and many batman-adv-y lines
* removed Makefile.kbuild, README, README.external, compat.c, compat.h, gen-compat-autoconf.sh
* removed references to compat.h from main.h
* (Re)Moved sysfs-class-net-batman-adv and sysfs-class-net-mesh



h2. rebase on top of previous subtree merge/-rc1 merge 


<pre>
'-(%25)-(merge/master)> git checkout -b patches
'-(%25)-(patches)> git rebase -s subtree origin/merge/master
First, rewinding head to replay your work on top of it...
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/main.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/routing.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/send.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/soft-interface.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/vis.c
[detached HEAD 166b2ca] batman-adv: Convert names from Java to C style
 Author: Antonio Quartulli <ordex@ritirata.org>
 7 files changed, 18 insertions(+), 18 deletions(-)
Committed: 0001 batman-adv: Convert names from Java to C style
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/translation-table.c
[detached HEAD 5cd6523] batman-adv: Avoid rounding issues for local hna timeout
 Author: Linus Lüssing <linus.luessing@web.de>
 1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 1 deletions(-)
Committed: 0002 batman-adv: Avoid rounding issues for local hna timeout
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/originator.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/translation-table.c
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/vis.c
[detached HEAD 83d1bc8] batman-adv: Lower resolution for timeouts
 Author: Simon Wunderlich <siwu@hrz.tu-chemnitz.de>
 5 files changed, 7 insertions(+), 10 deletions(-)
Committed: 0003 batman-adv: Lower resolution for timeouts
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/send.c
[detached HEAD 9e9605f] batman-adv: replace manual calculation by msecs_to_jiffies() for better readability
 Author: Marek Lindner <lindner_marek@yahoo.de>
 1 files changed, 4 insertions(+), 4 deletions(-)
Committed: 0004 batman-adv: replace manual calculation by msecs_to_jiffies() for better readability
[detached HEAD 043aa9a] batman-adv: Add sysfs abi documentation about bonding
 Author: Marek Lindner <lindner_marek@yahoo.de>
 1 files changed, 8 insertions(+), 0 deletions(-)
Committed: 0005 batman-adv: Add sysfs abi documentation about bonding
[detached HEAD f6d8bab] batman-adv: adapting source version to revised versioning scheme
 Author: Marek Lindner <lindner_marek@yahoo.de>
 1 files changed, 1 insertions(+), 1 deletions(-)
Committed: 0006 batman-adv: adapting source version to revised versioning scheme
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/Makefile
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in net/batman-adv/Makefile

When you have resolved this problem run "git rebase --continue".
If you would prefer to skip this patch, instead run "git rebase --skip".
To restore the original branch and stop rebasing run "git rebase --abort".
'-(%25)-(f6d8baba5fce6161bc2cee9c97e0afbc139942c0)> vim net/batman-adv/Makefile
'-(%25)-(f6d8baba5fce6161bc2cee9c97e0afbc139942c0)> git add net/batman-adv/Makefile
'-(%25)-(f6d8baba5fce6161bc2cee9c97e0afbc139942c0)> git rebase -s subtree --continue
Already applied: 0007 batman-adv: Use nproc to get number of available processors
CONFLICT (delete/modify): net/batman-adv/compat.h deleted in origin/merge/master and modified in HEAD~1. Version HEAD~1 of net/batman-adv/compat.h left in tree.

When you have resolved this problem run "git rebase --continue".
If you would prefer to skip this patch, instead run "git rebase --skip".
To restore the original branch and stop rebasing run "git rebase --abort".
'-(%25)-(f6d8baba5fce6161bc2cee9c97e0afbc139942c0)> git rm net/batman-adv/compat.h
net/batman-adv/compat.h: needs merge
rm 'net/batman-adv/compat.h'
'-(%25)-(f6d8baba5fce6161bc2cee9c97e0afbc139942c0)> git rebase -s subtree --continue
[detached HEAD a85d1b4] batman-adv: Add include guards to all header files
 17 files changed, 78 insertions(+), 12 deletions(-)
Committed: 0008 batman-adv: Add include guards to all header files
Auto-merging net/batman-adv/Makefile
CONFLICT (content): Merge conflict in net/batman-adv/Makefile
CONFLICT (delete/modify): net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild deleted in origin/merge/master and modified in HEAD~0. Version HEAD~0 of net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild left in tree.

When you have resolved this problem run "git rebase --continue".
If you would prefer to skip this patch, instead run "git rebase --skip".
To restore the original branch and stop rebasing run "git rebase --abort".
'-(%25)-(a85d1b45e4cde0c882a41baaefeec0cd5502416f)> git rm net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild
net/batman-adv/Makefile: needs merge
net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild: needs merge
rm 'net/batman-adv/Makefile.kbuild'
'-(%25)-(a85d1b45e4cde0c882a41baaefeec0cd5502416f)> vim net/batman-adv/Makefile
'-(%25)-(a85d1b45e4cde0c882a41baaefeec0cd5502416f)> git add net/batman-adv/Makefile
'-(%25)-(a85d1b45e4cde0c882a41baaefeec0cd5502416f)> git rebase -s subtree --continue
Already applied: 0009 batman-adv: Add support for git revision string
All done.
'-(%25)-(patches)> git diff merge/master
</pre>

The last diff must be empty or we did something wrong.


h2. squash/cleanup patches


<pre>
'-(%25)-(patches)> git rebase -i origin/merge/master
Successfully rebased and updated refs/heads/patches
</pre>


h2. check if all patches compile cleanly against our linux tree with sparse (cgcc) 

We assume that the linux-merge tree was already build with @make allnoconfig@ and then enabling @CONFIG_NET=y@, @CONFIG_MODULES=y@  and @CONFIG_CRC16=y@

<pre>
'-(%25)-(patches)> git rev-list --reverse origin/merge/master..
166b2caa61fce5260aed4e119671764331fdc62a
5cd65234b12021fe1f28e28e455a6b6a06712ec2
83d1bc8bb328bcfa42be492fe0e2648b77c18af2
9e9605f0fe000f1097cb43271540ab2b76b2a782
043aa9a54a5296c6027a5bcd808b8d29cea8a474
f6d8baba5fce6161bc2cee9c97e0afbc139942c0
a85d1b45e4cde0c882a41baaefeec0cd5502416f
'-(%25)-(patches)> cd net/batman-adv/
'-(%25)-(patches)> git checkout 166b2caa61fce5260aed4e119671764331fdc62a
Previous HEAD position was a85d1b4... batman-adv: Avoid rounding issues for local hna timeout
HEAD is now at 166b2ca... batman-adv: Convert names from Java to C style
'-(%25)-(166b2caa61fce5260aed4e119671764331fdc62a)> make CONFIG_BATMAN_ADV=m CC=cgcc -C ../../ M=`pwd`
...
'-(%25)-(166b2caa61fce5260aed4e119671764331fdc62a)> git checkout 5cd65234b12021fe1f28e28e455a6b6a06712ec2
Previous HEAD position was 166b2ca... batman-adv: Convert names from Java to C style
HEAD is now at 5cd6523... batman-adv: Avoid rounding issues for local hna timeout
'-(%25)-(83d1bc8bb328bcfa42be492fe0e2648b77c18af2)> make CONFIG_BATMAN_ADV=m CC=cgcc -C ../../ M=`pwd`
....
'-(%25)-(83d1bc8bb328bcfa42be492fe0e2648b77c18af2)> git checkout 9e9605f0fe000f1097cb43271540ab2b76b2a782
Previous HEAD position was 83d1bc8... batman-adv: Lower resolution for timeouts
HEAD is now at 9e9605f... batman-adv: replace manual calculation by msecs_to_jiffies() for better readability
'-(%25)-(9e9605f0fe000f1097cb43271540ab2b76b2a782)> make CONFIG_BATMAN_ADV=m CC=cgcc -C ../../ M=`pwd`
....
'-(%25)-(9e9605f0fe000f1097cb43271540ab2b76b2a782)> git checkout 043aa9a54a5296c6027a5bcd808b8d29cea8a474
Previous HEAD position was 9e9605f... batman-adv: replace manual calculation by msecs_to_jiffies() for better readability
HEAD is now at 043aa9a... batman-adv: Add sysfs abi documentation about bonding
'-(%25)-(043aa9a54a5296c6027a5bcd808b8d29cea8a474)> make CONFIG_BATMAN_ADV=m CC=cgcc -C ../../ M=`pwd`
...
'-(%25)-(043aa9a54a5296c6027a5bcd808b8d29cea8a474)> git checkout f6d8baba5fce6161bc2cee9c97e0afbc139942c0
Previous HEAD position was 043aa9a... batman-adv: Add sysfs abi documentation about bonding
HEAD is now at f6d8bab... batman-adv: adapting source version to revised versioning scheme
'-(%25)-(f6d8baba5fce6161bc2cee9c97e0afbc139942c0)> make CONFIG_BATMAN_ADV=m CC=cgcc -C ../../ M=`pwd`
...
'-(%25)-(f6d8baba5fce6161bc2cee9c97e0afbc139942c0)> git checkout a85d1b45e4cde0c882a41baaefeec0cd5502416f
Previous HEAD position was f6d8bab... batman-adv: adapting source version to revised versioning scheme
HEAD is now at a85d1b4... batman-adv: Add include guards to all header files
'-(%25)-(a85d1b45e4cde0c882a41baaefeec0cd5502416f)> make CONFIG_BATMAN_ADV=m CC=cgcc -C ../../ M=`pwd`
...
'-(%25)-(a85d1b45e4cde0c882a41baaefeec0cd5502416f)> git checkout patches
Switched to branch 'patches'
'-(%25)-(patches)> cd ../../../
</pre>



h2. check if all patches build cleanly

It must be checked whether it builds with allnoconfig (@+NET@,@+CRC16@,@+/-MODULES@) as module/builtin and allyesconfig as module/builtin

<pre>
'-(%25)-(patches)> make
....
</pre>

h2. format patches


<pre>
'-(%25)-(patches)> git format-patch --patience -s -M origin/merge/master
0001-batman-adv-Convert-names-from-Java-to-C-style.patch
0002-batman-adv-Avoid-rounding-issues-for-local-hna-timeo.patch
0003-batman-adv-Lower-resolution-for-timeouts.patch
0004-batman-adv-replace-manual-calculation-by-msecs_to_ji.patch
0005-batman-adv-Add-sysfs-abi-documentation-about.patch
0006-batman-adv-adapting-source-version-to-revised-versio.patch
0007-batman-adv-Add-include-guards-to-all-header-files.patch
'-(%25)-(patches)> vim 00*.patch
</pre>

Usually I add "batman-adv: " right when checking the signed-off-by and author (from) line. Patches which are also important bugfixes for older kernels (Kernel-Oops, Deadlock, ...) must also submitted to stable@kernel.org. It is done by adding  "Cc: stable@kernel.org" to this patch.


h2. checkpatch patches


<pre>
'-(%25)-(patches)> ./scripts/checkpatch.pl --strict 00*.patch
total: 0 errors, 0 warnings, 0 checks, 135 lines checked

0001-batman-adv-Convert-names-from-Java-to-C-styl.patch has no obvious style problems and is ready for submission.
total: 0 errors, 0 warnings, 0 checks, 8 lines checked

0002-batman-adv-Avoid-rounding-issues-for-local-h.patch has no obvious style problems and is ready for submission.
total: 0 errors, 0 warnings, 0 checks, 55 lines checked

0003-batman-adv-Lower-resolution-for-timeouts.patch has no obvious style problems and is ready for submission.
total: 0 errors, 0 warnings, 0 checks, 19 lines checked

0004-batman-adv-replace-manual-calculation-by-mse.patch has no obvious style problems and is ready for submission.
total: 0 errors, 0 warnings, 0 checks, 14 lines checked

0005-batman-adv-Add-sysfs-abi-documentation-about.patch has no obvious style problems and is ready for submission.
total: 0 errors, 0 warnings, 0 checks, 8 lines checked

0006-batman-adv-adapting-source-version-to-revise.patch has no obvious style problems and is ready for submission.
total: 0 errors, 0 warnings, 0 checks, 239 lines checked

0007-batman-adv-Add-include-guards-to-all-header-.patch has no obvious style problems and is ready for submission.
</pre>


h2. submit patches


<pre>
'-(%25)-(patches)> git checkout batman-adv/next
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git rev-parse batman-adv/next
12513b76a021e5b41a9d5d5981da75dfd6480890
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git am -3 00*.patch
Applying: batman-adv: Convert names from Java to C style
Applying: batman-adv: Avoid rounding issues for local hna timeout
Applying: batman-adv: Lower resolution for timeouts
Applying: batman-adv: replace manual calculation by msecs_to_jiffies() for better readability
Applying: batman-adv: Add sysfs abi documentation about bonding
Applying: batman-adv: adapting source version to revised versioning scheme
Applying: batman-adv: Add include guards to all header files
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git diff merge/master -- net/batman-adv/
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git push
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git tag -d batman-adv-for-davem
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git push origin :batman-adv-for-davem
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git tag -s batman-adv-for-davem
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git push origin batman-adv-for-davem
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git request-pull 12513b76a021e5b41a9d5d5981da75dfd6480890 git://git.open-mesh.org/linux-merge.git batman-adv-for-davem > shortlog
'-(%25)-(batman-adv/next)> git send-email --compose --to=davem@davemloft.net --cc=netdev@vger.kernel.org --cc=b.a.t.m.a.n@lists.open-mesh.org 00*.patch
</pre>

Now I will write something like

<pre>
From Sven Eckelmann <sven@narfation.org> # This line is ignored.
GIT: Lines beginning in "GIT:" will be removed.
GIT: Consider including an overall diffstat or table of contents
GIT: for the patch you are writing.
GIT:
GIT: Clear the body content if you don't wish to send a summary.
From: Sven Eckelmann <sven@narfation.org>
Subject: pull request: batman-adv 2011-06-20
In-Reply-To:

Hi,

I would like to propose following changes for net-next/3.1. The
first part (1-4) are only only small cleanup patches. The last 8 patches
are related to Antonio Quartulli's research "Client announcement and
Fast roaming in a Layer-2 mesh network". The technical report isn't
published yet, but will hopefully follow soon. He tried to document all
important parts in some (unofficial) documents [1,2,3].

thanks,
        Sven

[1] http://www.open-mesh.org/wiki/batman-adv/Client-announcement
[2] http://www.open-mesh.org/wiki/batman-adv/Client-roaming
[3] http://www.open-mesh.org/wiki/batman-adv/Uevent


The following changes since commit ecbd532108cb21d9d3770f73e168bad65d14d9eb:

  batman-adv: use NO_FLAGS define instead of hard-coding 0 (2011-06-09 20:40:38 +0200)

are available in the git repository at:
  git://git.open-mesh.org/ecsv/linux-merge.git batman-adv/next

Antonio Quartulli (8):
      batman-adv: Unify the first 3 bytes in each packet
      batman-adv: improved client announcement mechanism
      batman-adv: improved roaming mechanism
      batman-adv: protect the local and the global trans-tables with rcu
      batman-adv: add wrapper function to throw uevent in userspace
      batman-adv: gateway election code refactoring
      batman-adv: throw uevent in userspace on gateway add/change/del event
      batman-adv: improved gateway tq-based selection

David Howells (1):
      batman-adv: count_real_packets() in batman-adv assumes char is signed

Sven Eckelmann (3):
      batman-adv: Move compare_orig to originator.c
      batman-adv: Keep interface_tx as local function
      batman-adv: Reduce usage of char

 net/batman-adv/Kconfig             |    1 +
 net/batman-adv/aggregation.c       |   25 +-
 net/batman-adv/aggregation.h       |    8 +-
 net/batman-adv/bat_sysfs.c         |   73 ++-
 net/batman-adv/bat_sysfs.h         |    2 +
 net/batman-adv/bitarray.c          |    8 +-
 net/batman-adv/bitarray.h          |    8 +-
 net/batman-adv/gateway_client.c    |  238 +++++--
 net/batman-adv/gateway_client.h    |    3 +-
 net/batman-adv/gateway_common.c    |    6 +-
 net/batman-adv/hard-interface.c    |   17 +-
 net/batman-adv/main.c              |   18 +-
 net/batman-adv/main.h              |   27 +-
 net/batman-adv/originator.c        |   17 +-
 net/batman-adv/originator.h        |    8 -
 net/batman-adv/packet.h            |   92 ++-
 net/batman-adv/routing.c           |  317 +++++++--
 net/batman-adv/routing.h           |    7 +-
 net/batman-adv/send.c              |   92 ++-
 net/batman-adv/send.h              |    2 +-
 net/batman-adv/soft-interface.c    |   26 +-
 net/batman-adv/soft-interface.h    |    1 -
 net/batman-adv/translation-table.c | 1428 ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++------
 net/batman-adv/translation-table.h |   38 +-
 net/batman-adv/types.h             |   64 ++-
 net/batman-adv/unicast.c           |    3 +
 net/batman-adv/vis.c               |   13 +-
 27 files changed, 2080 insertions(+), 462 deletions(-)
</pre>