h1. Understand your B.A.T.M.A.N. Advanced network

This document assumes you have created a batman-adv network and are interested in finding out how batman routes the traffic from node to node, getting an access to the whole network topology and/or wish understand why batman is doing what it is doing. Batman provides a set of debug tools and debug tables which aim to facilitate this task. Explaining the routing decisions / various routing optimizations are not in the scope of this document. Links to complementary documents will be provided if available.


+Note+: Although this document focusses on the "raw" debugfs interface you always can use batctl for a more convenient access to the data. This document assumes debugfs was mounted at /sys/kernel/debug/. Please adjust the given examples if your system mounts the filesystem somewhere else. The batctl tool will automatically mount debugfs whenever you try to access functionality that require it. This document also assumes that you created a mesh cloud "bat0". [[tweaking|This page]] provides background information on how to handle mesh clouds.


h2. Tables


h3. originator table

Each batman node maintains a list of all other nodes in the network and remembers in which direction to send the packets if data should be transmitted. The direction manifests itself in the form of the "best next neighbor" which basically is the next step towards the destination. You can retrieve batman's internal originator table by reading the originators file. The printed table begins with a header line with some more or less useful status data, followed by the data. Each line contains information regarding a specific originator: 

<pre>
<originator>
   <last-seen> 
      <TQ (transmit quality) value towards the originator> 
         <next best hop> 
            <outgoing iface> 
               <alternative best next hops>
</pre>

Sample output:
<pre>
cat /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/originators
Originator      last-seen (#/255)           Nexthop [outgoingIF]:   Potential nexthops ... [B.A.T.M.A.N. adv 0.3.0-alpha, [[MainIF]]/MAC: eth0/fe:fe:00:00:01:01 (bat0)] 
fe:fe:00:00:02:01  0.360s   (133) fe:fe:00:00:02:01 [      eth0]: fe:fe:00:00:02:01 (133)
</pre>

h3. translation tables

To let non-batman nodes use the mesh infrastructure easily, batman-adv introduced mac translation tables: When a batman-adv node detects that a client wishes to communicate over the mesh it will store the client's mac address in the local translation table and flood the network with the information that this mac address / client is attached to this batman-adv node. As soon as other nodes wish to send data to the client, they will search the client's mac in the mesh-wide (global) translation table, to find the corresponding batman-adv node. Then the data gets transmitted to the batman node first which then relays it to the client.

The local translation table (mac addresses announced by this host) can be found in the transtable_local file:

<pre>
<non-mesh client mac address>
   <VLAN tag> 
      <flags> 
         <last seen> 
            <CRC> 
</pre>

Sample output:
<pre>
cat /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/transtable_local
Locally retrieved addresses (from bat0) announced via TT (TTVN: 2):
       Client         VID Flags   Last seen (CRC       )
 * fe:fe:00:00:01:01   -1 [.P...]   0.000   (0x0aeb181b)
 * fe:fe:00:00:02:02   10 [RPNXW]   0.000   (0x6b08a689)
</pre>

The current translation table state is represented by the tt version number and the local tt crc that are propagated in the mesh.
In particular, RPNXW are flags which bear the following meanings:
* R/Roaming: this client moved to another node but it is still kept for consistency reasons until the next OGM is sent.
* P/noPurge: this client represents the local soft interface and will never be deleted.
* N/New: this client has recently been added but is not advertised in the mesh until the next OGM is sent (for consistency reasons).
* X/delete: this client has to be removed for some reason, but it is still kept for consistency reasons until the next OGM is sent.
* W/Wireless: this client is connected to the node through a wireless device.

If any of the flags is not enabled, a '.' will substitute its symbol.
Note: Every batman node announces at least one mac address - the mac of the batX interface. 


The global translation table (mac addresses announced by other hosts) can be found in the transtable_global file:

<pre>
cat /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/transtable_global 
Globally announced TT entries received via the mesh bat0
   Client            (TTVN)     Originator        (Curr TTVN) (CRC   ) Flags
 * fe:fe:00:00:01:01  ( 12) via fe:fe:00:00:02:01       ( 50) (0xff9a) [RXW]
 + fe:fe:00:00:01:01  ( 24) via ca:ca:00:00:02:01       ( 32) [RXW]
</pre>

Each line contains the announced mac address, the ttvn at the point of the addition to the table and the mac of the batman node announcing it including the latest ttvn and table crc of that very node. The meaning of flags are similar to those above:
* R/Roaming: this client moved to another node but it is still kept for consistency reasons until the next OGM is sent.
* X/delete: this client has to be removed for some reason, but it is still kept for consistency reasons until the next OGM is sent.
* W/Wireless: this client is connected to the node through a wireless device.

If any of the flags is not enabled, a '.' will substitute its symbol.

Since the introduction of the [[Bridge-loop-avoidance-II|Bridge Loop Avoidance 2]], each client can be reached through multiple originators and therefore it is possible to have the same client appearing more than one in the list.
In this case there will be one line starting with '*' indicating the default entry to be used to route traffic towards this client and some (zero or more) entries starting with '+' indicating other possible routes. The line related to "possible routes" do not have a CRC value.

h3. Gateway table

The gateway table lists all available batman-adv gateways in this network (see the [[gateways|gateway documentation]] to learn how to use this feature). Each line contains information about a specific gateway:

<pre>
<selection symbol>
   <gateway> 
      <TQ (transmit quality) value towards the gateway> 
         <next best hop> 
            <outgoing iface> 
               <gateway class - announced throughput>
</pre>

For example:

<pre>
      Gateway      (#/255)           Nexthop [outgoingIF]: gw_class ... [B.A.T.M.A.N. adv devel 1886, [[MainIF]]/MAC: eth0/fe:fe:00:00:03:01 (bat0)]
   fe:fe:00:00:01:01 (233) fe:fe:00:00:01:01 [      eth0]:  41 - 2048KBit/512KBit
=> fe:fe:00:00:02:01 (243) fe:fe:00:00:02:01 [      eth0]:  41 - 2048KBit/512KBit
</pre>

h3. Bridge loop avoidance claim table

This table is part of the [[bridge-loop-avoidance|bridge loop avoidance]] code and contains all claimed clients as announced on the bridge. Each line contains a claimed non-mesh client propagated through the mesh:

<pre>
<non-mesh client mac address>
   <vlan id> 
      <originator claiming this client> 
         <is client claimed by me> 
            <CRC checksum of the entire claim table> 
</pre>

Note: 

 * Clients claimed by the node itself are marked with an '[x]'.
 * If no VLAN was found a VID of '-1' is printed. 

<pre>
cat /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/bla_claim_table
Claims announced for the mesh bat0 (orig fe:f0:00:00:02:01, group id 9b95)
    Client               VID      Originator        [o] (CRC )
  * fe:f1:00:00:04:01 on    -1 by fe:f0:00:00:02:01 [x] (0bab)
  * fe:f1:00:00:03:01 on    -1 by fe:f0:00:00:01:01 [ ] (3ba9)
</pre>

h3. Bridge loop avoidance backbone table

This table is part of the [[bridge-loop-avoidance|bridge loop avoidance]] code and contains all backbone gateways. Each line contains a backbone gateway which is reachable via LAN and mesh (that means, it is in the same bla group):

<pre>
<backbone gateway originator mac address>
   <vlan id> 
      <originator claiming this client> 
         <last seen time> 
            <CRC checksum of the entire claim table> 
</pre>

Note: 

 * the own originator address is not printed, only other backbone gateways
 * If no VLAN was found a VID of '-1' is printed. 
 * the last seen time should be between 0 and 10 seconds if there is no packet lost


<pre>
cat /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/bla_backbone_table 
Backbones announced for the mesh bat0 (orig fe:f0:00:00:01:01, group id 9b95)
   Originator           VID   last seen (CRC )
 * fe:f0:00:00:02:01 on    -1    4.000s (0bab)
 * fe:f0:00:00:03:01 on    -1    3.000s (3ba9)
</pre>

h3. Distributed ARP Table - local cache table

This table is part of the [[DistributedARPTable|Distributed ARP Table]] code and contains all the locally cached ARP entries (IPv4+MAC address).
If a given IP address appears in this table it means that batman-adv will prevent any ARP Request asking for such address to be sent through the mesh and will immediately provide an answer to the LAN on its own.
A subset of the entries belonging to this cache are also the entries which the node is in charge to handle in the [[DistributedARPTable-technical|DHT]]

<pre>
<host IPv4 address>
   <host mac address>
      <last ARP seen time>
</pre>

For example:

<pre>
cat /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/dat_cache 
Distributed ARP Table (bat0):
          IPv4             MAC           last-seen
 *     172.100.0.1 92:9d:f4:e3:54:40      0:30
</pre>

h3. Network coding - potential coding neighbor table

This table is part of the [[NetworkCoding|network coding]] code and contains all detected incoming and outgoing network coding possibilities. Each entry starts with the address of a one-hop neighbor (the "Node:" line), followed by a line for ingoing nodes and a line outgoing nodes.

"Ingoing nodes" shows addresses of nodes that the one-hop neighbor can overhear packets from. "Outgoing nodes" shows addresses of nodes that can overhear packets from the one-hop neighbor. The table is used by the NC code to search for potential coding opportunities, where a relay determines if two receivers are likely to be able to decode a network coded transmission.

<pre>
<Node: originator mac address>
   <Ingoing: mac address of nodes that this originator can overhear>
   <Outgoing: mac address of nodes that can overhear this originator>
</pre>

This example shows the entry for the one-hop originator with address fe:fe:00:00:02:01. Since a originator can always overhear packets to and from itself, its own address is listed as the first. In this case, the originator is able to overhear packets from fe:fe:00:00:03:01, which can also overhear packets sent from the originator.

<pre>
cat /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/nc_nodes 
Node:      fe:fe:00:00:02:01
 Ingoing:  fe:fe:00:00:02:01 fe:fe:00:00:03:01 
 Outgoing: fe:fe:00:00:02:01 fe:fe:00:00:03:01 
</pre>

h2. ICMP


Traditional network debugging tools based on the ICMP protocol such as ping or traceroute won't be able to perform their duties as expected. All traffic in the mesh will be transported to the destination transparently, so that higher protocols do not notice the number of hops or the route. This is one of the main reasons why you can roam around without breaking your connection. To provide the same type of diagnosis tools, batman-adv has an own simplified version of ICMP integrated in the protocol. Via debugfs it is possible to inject IMCP packets which behave very similar to their layer3 counterpart. The icmp socket file /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/icmp_socket can't be used with cat/echo directly, since it expects binary data. The batctl tool offers a ping / traceroute like interface that make use of this icmp socket interface. Please read the batctl manpage or the README file to learn how to use it or to see examples.


h2. Logging


Batman-adv offers extended logging to understand & debug the routing protocol internals. After you activated debugging at compile time (instructions can be found in "the README file":http://www.open-mesh.org/projects/batman-adv/repository/revisions/master/entry/README ) and the appropriate log level has been set (read about the log levels [[tweaking|here]]) you can retrieve the logs by simply reading the 'log' file:

<pre>
cat /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/bat0/log
[       418] Sending own packet (originator fe:fe:00:00:02:01, seqno 643, TQ 255, TTL 50, IDF off) on interface eth0 [fe:fe:00:00:02:01]
[       418] Received BATMAN packet via NB: fe:fe:00:00:01:01, IF: eth0 [fe:fe:00:00:02:01] (from OG: fe:fe:00:00:02:01, via prev OG: fe:fe:00:00:02:01, seqno 643, tq 245, TTL 49, V 12, IDF 1)
[       418] Drop packet: originator packet from myself (via neighbor)
[..]
</pre>

The log is a circular ring buffer and will continue writing messages as soon as they become available. 


h2. Visualization


Despite its decentralized nature, userspace tools like [[open-mesh:alfred|alfred]] offer an easy way to access topology information that can be visualized. The [[open-mesh:alfred|alfred page]] covers the necessary steps in detail.

h2. Routing algorithm

Batman-adv allows [[Tweaking|changing the routing algorithm]] at runtime. It also exports the list of available routing protocols:
<pre>
cat /sys/kernel/debug/batman_adv/routing_algos
Available routing algorithms:
BATMAN_IV
</pre>

B.A.T.M.A.N. IV is the default routing algorithm and a safe choice unless you wish to experiment with routing algorithms.