= batman-advanced =

Batman-advanced is a new approach to wireless networking which
does no longer operate on the IP basis. Unlike B.A.T.M.A.N, which exchanges
information using UDP packets and sets routing tables, batman-advanced operates
on ISO/OSI Layer 2 only and uses and routes (or better: bridges) Ethernet Frames.
It emulates a virtual network switch of all nodes participating. Therefore all nodes 
appear to be link local, thus all higher operating protocols won't be affected 
by any changes within the network. You can run almost any protocol above B.A.T.M.A.N.
Advanced, prominent examples are: IPv4, IPv6, DHCP, IPX. 

=== Pros and Cons ===
Pros:
 * supports any Ethernet-capable protocol (IPv4, IPv6, ARP, DHCP ...)
 * no manual IP assignment, just use DHCP
 * easy integration of attached networks (no manual HNA fiddling), just put the bat0 in the bridge with your other devices. You can for example build a roaming network of Access Points with this technique.
 * Not affected by your Firewall (but you can secure the payload traffic, of course)
Cons:
 * no gateway handling. 
=== battools ===

Since the nodes participating in the B.A.T.M.A.N. Advanced switch are
completely transparent for all protocols above layer 2, we needed to build
our own diagnostic tools, the battools. These tools contain a layer 2 version 
of ping,  traceroute and tcpdump. Further information can be found in the
enclosed README file.

=== batctl ===

Is a wrapper script that facilitates working with the /proc/net/batman-adv interface. It can be downloaded [http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/useful-scripts-and-tools/batctl here].


=== Userland vs Kernelland ===

The userland implementation of batman-advanced was a proof of concept implementation to verify that the concept is
working. Unfortunately, switching packets in userland is very expensive in terms of cycles, as each packet has to be
read() and write() to the kernel and back, which limits the sustainable bandwidth especially on low-end devices. 
To have good support for these devices as well, we implemented batman-adv as a kernel driver, which is now the 
preferred version. It can be controlled via the /proc file system and works transparently. The userland remains unmaintained and has been removed from the subversion repository.

=== Documentation ===

See the [wiki:UserDocs UserDocs] page.

=== Get it ===

see the [wiki:Download] page