== Announcing networks ==

Under certain circumstances it is desirable to make non-batman hosts (such as servers, [[BR]]
subnets, other routing domains or simple notebooks) known to the batman network. Batman [[BR]]
can announce these network addresses (also known as HNA) which tells every other batman [[BR]]
node to send the data for this network segment back to the announcing host (assuming [[BR]]
this host knows how to reach the destination). 

All following examples can also be applied as startup parameters. For the sake of simplicity [[BR]]
we assume there is a running batman daemon on the system that we can connect to.[[BR]]

Adding the announcement for e.g. the local network: [[BR]]
batmand -c -a 192.168.1.0/24 [[BR]]

Adding multiple announcements in one go: [[BR]]
batmand -c -a 192.168.1.0/24 -a 192.168.100.123/32 [[BR]]

Revoking an announcement: [[BR]]
batmand -c -A 192.168.1.0/24 [[BR]]

Revoking multiple announcements in one go: [[BR]]
batmand -c -A 192.168.1.0/24 -A 192.168.100.123/32 [[BR]]

It is worth noting that globally announced networks always give precendece to locally [[BR]]
announced networks. [[BR]]

__Important__: The above examples explain how the batman nodes can find the path [[BR]]
towards the non-batman network but you also have to ensure that the non-batman network[[BR]]
knows the path back. This can be accomplished by setting the routes manually, [[BR]]
masquerading, routing protocols, etc. [[BR]]

Batman 0.3.2 (and later versions) allow multiple nodes to announce the same network [[BR]]
segment. You may have one non-batman network but several entry points to it. All border[[BR]]
nodes can announce the same network. Receiving batman nodes choose their entry point [[BR]]
based on the best TQ value available. [[BR]]

