
== Working with the vis server output ==

This artcile is for those that intend to write their own visualization tool, combine the vis [[BR]]
output with a map  or want to understand the vis server output for another reason. If you [[BR]]
want to setup the vis server have a look at this [wiki:VisualizeMesh article]. [[BR]]


Here is a sample output from the vis server in the dot draw format. Newer vis versions offer [[BR]]
alternative formats (e.g. JSON) which follow the same rules but use another output style. [[BR]]

{{{
digraph topology
{
"5.174.37.225" -> "5.224.160.202"[label="2.13"]
"5.174.37.225" -> "192.168.15.0/24"[label="HNA"]
"5.174.117.226" -> "5.174.37.225"[label="5.00"]
"5.174.117.226" -> "0.0.0.0/0.0.0.0"[label="HNA"]
"5.224.160.202" -> "5.174.37.225"[label="1.28"]
"5.224.160.202" -> "0.0.0.0/0.0.0.0"[label="HNA"]
}
}}}

Each "digraph { ... }" block contains a complete dump of the vis servers internal database [[BR]]
at a given time. Every line contains the IP address of a batman node, a network it has a [[BR]]
relation to and a label. All nodes sending information to the vis server are listed in the first [[BR]]
column. If a node is missing you should check whether there is a connection problem. [[BR]]

[[BR]]

=== Batman to batman connection ===

{{{
"5.174.37.225" -> "5.224.160.202"[label="2.13"]
"5.224.160.202" -> "5.174.37.225"[label="1.28"]
}}}

The batman node 5.174.37.225 has a connection towards the batman node 5.224.160.202 [[BR]]
with a link quality of "2.13" whereas the 5.224.160.202 has a link quality of "1.28" towards [[BR]]
the 5.174.37.225. The connection is listed twice because each node reports it individually [[BR]]
which gives you the option of seeing asymetric links if you want to display it. [[BR]]

The link quality gives information how batman evaluates this link. 1.00 means 100%25 link  [[BR]]
quality, 2.00 means 50%25, 3.00 is 33.3%25 and 4.00 is 25%25, etc. The number tells you  how [[BR]]
many packets you need to send in order to get a single successful transmission. [[BR]]

While looking at originator tables, debug logs or other batman output you might see different  [[BR]]
numbers. Due to performance considerations batman uses his own format (TQ value) to [[BR]]
express link quality. Its max value is 255 and goes down to 0 (float operations are quite [[BR]]
expensive on embedded devices). The vis server transforms the TQ value into its own format [[BR]]
before outputting it. [[BR]]

[[BR]]

=== Internet gateways ===

{{{
"5.224.160.202" -> "0.0.0.0/0.0.0.0"[label="HNA"]
}}}

The 5.224.160.202 announces a connection to the internet: "0.0.0.0/0.0.0.0" and the HNA label [[BR]]
represent gateway functionality in the output.

[[BR]]

=== Announced networks ===

{{{
"5.174.37.225" -> "192.168.15.0/24"[label="HNA"]
}}}

The 5.174.37.225 announces a connection to the 192.168.15.0/24 network (which does not run [[BR]]
batman). All nodes that establish a connection to this network use the 5.174.37.225 as gateway.
