h1. A.L.F.R.E.D - Almighty Lightweight Fact Remote Exchange Daemon

"alfred is a user space daemon to efficiently[tm] flood the network with useless data - like vis, weather data, network notes, etc"
> - Marek Lindner, 2012

h2. Introduction

alfred is a user space daemon for distributing arbitrary local information over the mesh/network in a decentralized fashion. This data can be anything which appears to be useful - originally designed to replace the batman-adv visualization (vis), you may distribute hostnames, phone books, administration information, DNS information, the local weather forecast ...

alfred runs as daemon in the background of the system. A user may insert information by using the alfred binary in client mode, or use special programs to communicate with alfred (done via unix sockets). alfred then takes care of distributing the local information to other alfred servers on other nodes. This is done via IPv6 link-local multicast, and does not require any configuration. A user can request data from alfred, and will receive the information available from all alfred servers in the network.

h2. More information

See the "README":http://git.open-mesh.org/alfred.git/blob_plain/refs/heads/master:/README

h2. Download

Release tarballs as well as snapshots are available:

 * release tarballs: [[Download#Download-Released-Source-Code|Check the Download page]]
 * git web directory: http://git.open-mesh.org/alfred.git
 * git download: git clone git://git.open-mesh.org/alfred.git
 * snapshot:http://git.open-mesh.org/alfred.git/snapshot/refs/heads/master.tar.gz

h3. OpenWRT installation from routing feed

Alfred is also part of the routing feed of OpenWRT. For newer OpenWRT, just use:

1. Install the alfred package:

./scripts/feeds install alfred

3. Run "make menuconfig" and select alfred (available under "Network  --->")

h3. OpenWRT development feed

There is also a development packet feed for OpenWRT available for alfred:

1. add the alfred feed by adding the following line into your feeds.conf:

   src-git alfred git://git.open-mesh.org/openwrt-feed-alfred.git

2. Update and install the feed:

 ./scripts/feeds update
./scripts/feeds install alfred

3. Run "make menuconfig" and select alfred (available under "Network  --->")

Finally, re-build Openwrt and enjoy using alfred! :)