h1. A.L.F.R.E.D - Almighty Lightweight Fact Remote Exchange Daemon

"alfred is a user space daemon to efficiently[tm] flood the network with useless data - like vis, weather data, network notes, etc"

    - Marek Lindner, 2012

{{TOC}}

alfred is a user space daemon for distributing arbitrary local information over the mesh/network in a decentralized fashion. This data can be anything which appears to be useful - originally designed to replace the batman-adv visualization (vis), you may distribute hostnames, phone books, administration information, DNS information, the local weather forecast ...

Typically, alfred runs as unix daemon in the background of the system. A user may insert information by using the alfred binary on the command line, or use custom written programs to communicate with alfred directly through unix sockets. Once the local data is received, the alfred daemon takes care of distributing this information to other alfred servers on other nodes somewhere in the network. As addressing scheme IPv6 link-local multicast addresses are used which do not require any manual configuration. A user can request data from alfred, and will receive the information available from all alfred servers in the network.

See the "README":http://git.open-mesh.org/alfred.git/blob_plain/refs/heads/master:/README for more information or the "manpage":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/manpages/alfred.8.html for usage.

h2. Getting started

 * [[Building information]] - how to download and build alfred
 * [[batadv-vis]] - Tool to visualize batman-adv networks
 * [[alfred-gpsd]] - Share geolocation of mesh nodes

h2. Developer information

 * [[batman-adv:Alfred architecture]] - information about topologies, internal architecture and packet format

h2. Further resources

 * alfred slave on android: https://github.com/basros/alfreda
 * Wireshark dissector for alfred: https://github.com/basros/alfred-dissector