h1. Download B.A.T.M.A.N.

We are currently working on different branches. To get the details about the differences of these branches, see our [[BranchesExplained|Branches Explained page]].

Please use the maint branch for your public infrastructure unless you know exactly what you are doing and are prepared for the big unknown.


h2. Download Released Source Code

* The latest version of [[batman-adv:Wiki|batman-adv]] is "batman-adv-2012.3.0.tar.gz":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batman-adv/batman-adv-2012.3.0.tar.gz "md5":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batman-adv/batman-adv-2012.3.0.tar.gz.md5 "sha1":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batman-adv/batman-adv-2012.3.0.tar.gz.sha1 "asc":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batman-adv/batman-adv-2012.3.0.tar.gz.asc
* The latest version of batctl (management and control tool for batman-adv) is "batctl-2012.3.0.tar.gz":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/batctl-2012.3.0.tar.gz "md5":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/batctl-2012.3.0.tar.gz.md5 "sha1":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/batctl-2012.3.0.tar.gz.sha1 "asc":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/batctl-2012.3.0.tar.gz.asc

* The latest stable version of batmand ([[open-mesh:BranchesExplained#batmand|unmaintained]]) is "batman-0.3.2.tar.gz":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/batman-0.3.2/batman-0.3.2.tar.gz "md5":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/batman-0.3.2/batman-0.3.2.tar.gz.md5 "sha1":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/batman-0.3.2/batman-0.3.2.tar.gz.sha1 "asc":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/batman-0.3.2/batman-0.3.2.tar.gz.asc
* The latest version of the vis server for the batmand (package not needed for batman-adv) is "vis-0.3.2.tar.gz":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/batman-0.3.2/vis-0.3.2.tar.gz "md5":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/batman-0.3.2/vis-0.3.2.tar.gz.md5 "sha1":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/batman-0.3.2/vis-0.3.2.tar.gz.sha1 "asc":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/batman-0.3.2/vis-0.3.2.tar.gz.asc

If you are wondering whether batman-adv or batmand might suit your setup better, have a look at [[batman-adv:Wiki|this page]]. Please note that the development is focusing on batman-adv at the moment.

To download previous release tarballs, simply check out our "download section":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/.

If you find any bugs, please [[Contribute|let us know]]!


h2. Git Repository Access

Since we started integrating the batman-adv kernel module into the mainline Linux tree, we maintain a git repository which contains the batman-adv maintenance branches. More information can be found [[UsingBatmanGit|on our git page]].
On overview about all the git repositories can be found on our "git frontend":http://git.open-mesh.org. We also host individual repositories for development related to batman or meshing in general. Feel free to contact us if you are interested in getting a repository too.


h2. batman-adv in the Linux tree


Since linux 2.6.33 batman-adv is part of the official linux tree. You can build batman-adv along with your linux binary by simply selecting batman-adv in the Linux drivers section. If you use an older kernel or want to have access to the latest features you can checkout our git repository which still are backward compatible until 2.6.29.

It follows an overview of linux versions and the batman-adv version they contain, so that you can easily pick the compatible batctl packages:
* linux 2.6.33 => batman-adv 0.2.0 (get batctl 0.2.0 from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 2.6.34 => batman-adv 0.2.1 (get batctl 0.2.1 from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 2.6.35 => batman-adv 2010.0.x (get batctl 2010.0.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 2.6.36 => batman-adv 2010.1.x (get batctl 2010.1.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 2.6.37 => batman-adv 2010.2.x (get batctl 2010.2.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 2.6.38 => batman-adv 2011.0.x (get batctl 2011.0.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 2.6.39 => batman-adv 2011.1.x (get batctl 2011.1.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 3.0 => batman-adv 2011.2.x (get batctl 2011.2.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 3.1 => batman-adv 2011.3.x (get batctl 2011.3.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 3.2 => batman-adv 2011.4.x (get batctl 2011.4.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 3.3 => batman-adv 2012.0.x (get batctl 2012.0.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 3.4 => batman-adv 2012.1.x (get batctl 2012.1.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 3.5 => batman-adv 2012.2.x (get batctl 2012.2.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)
* linux 3.6 => batman-adv 2012.3.x (get batctl 2012.3.x from "here":http://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/stable/sources/batctl/)

h2. Debian


Use apt-get (or any other dpkg frontend of choice) to install B.A.T.M.A.N. onto your debian machine. Following packages are available:
* "batmand":http://packages.debian.org/sid/batmand - batman 0.3.2
* "batctl":http://packages.debian.org/sid/batctl - batctl 2012.1.0
* "batman-adv-source":http://packages.debian.org/squeeze/batman-adv-source - batman-advanced kernel 2010.0.0 module source for Debian Squeeze (installable via "module-assistant":http://packages.debian.org/squeeze/module-assistant) 
* "batman-adv-dkms":http://packages.debian.org/squeeze/batman-adv-dkms - batman-advanced kernel module 2010.0.0 dkms package for Debian Squeeze to build new modules dynamically (half-automatic) 
* "linux-2.6":http://packages.debian.org/source/unstable/linux-2.6 - batman-advanced kernel module as "part of the official":http://bugs.debian.org/622361 kernel packages

Similar packages are also available through "Ubuntu universe":https://help.ubuntu.com/community/Repositories/Ubuntu .


h2. Gentoo

Use emerge to build B.A.T.M.A.N. on your gentoo machine. Following ebuilds are available:
* "net-misc/batctl":http://packages.gentoo.org/package/net-misc/batctl
* "net-misc/batman-adv":http://packages.gentoo.org/package/net-misc/batman-adv

h2. openSUSE

* "network:utilities / batctl":https://build.opensuse.org/package/show?package=batctl&project=network%253Autilities
* the batman-adv module is available as module in the official kernel packages


h2. Building OpenWRT packages


B.A.T.M.A.N. is also included in OpenWRT as a package. Download the extra package feed, link the batman folder into your main OpenWRT svn directory and use "make menuconfig" to select the B.A.T.M.A.N. flavor you intend to use. This enables you to integrate B.A.T.M.A.N. seamlessly into your builds (see [[batman-adv:building-with-openwrt|this page]] for a detailed explanation).

More information about how to build the OpenWRT toolchain is available "here":http://wiki.openwrt.org/OpenWrtDocs/BuildingKamikazeHowTo.
