
h1. [[MeshLinux]]

*Linux distribution geared to build mesh supernodes - routers with many wireless interfaces and plenty CPU power on X86 platform*

Meshlinux is available as a CD-Image that can be used to convert old PCs into wireless supernodes. There is a old Meshlinux version based on Linux (Kernel 2.4.26) available at (http://zolder.scii.nl/~elektra/) This old version is based on Slackware and not maintained anymore. However it works nicely with old Atmel USB wireless devices (which is a problem nowadays with recent kernels), Prism-based Chipsets and Orinoco. If you want to build a meshrouter with this kind of wireless devices you may still use it and install a recent version of B.A.T.M.A.N. - you can download a statically compiled version from this server. New releases will be published here at Open-Mesh. *Update*: I'm sorry that I didn't publish a new version yet. The development is stalled at the moment. I wanted a distribution for PCs, like I have done earlier based on Slackware. But [[OpenWRT]] doesn't suit this purpose: After I finished the system I found that it is not capable to automatically load necessary modules. And each and every kernel module is a seperate package - you as the user have to know which hardware you have and which module to install. Don't get me wrong - it is a great embedded system if you take it as it is. When you have embedded hardware you know what is inside, and there is a minimum of space. So you know which kernelmodule you have to install in order to make your hardware work. But it is nothing like: Put this CD in the drive of an old, random PC and there you go... I already head this working before with my earlier versions. Transforming [[OpenWRT]] into this seems to be too much hazzle. After spending quite a while on this I ran out of time. I'll do it the 'old' way based on an old fashioned, simple and rock solid distro like Slackware when I have the time.