h1. DRAFT: Batman-adv 2018.4 released

Nov 06th, 2018. Today the B.A.T.M.A.N. team publishes the November 2018 update to batman-adv, batctl and alfred! This release contains mostly code refactorization in batctl for more netlink work in the future. Alfred's IPv4 implementation was polished to better handle missing MAC addresses in the ARP neighbor table. The batman-adv kernel modules now yields better results for TX throughput tests and allows to receive its debug messages via the Linux kernel's tracepoint infrastructure. The multicast support is now by default (like in the kernel) also disabled  in the out-of-tree module. Accessing the debugfs files will now create warning messages that a different method of retrieving the information should be used. As usual, this release also contains various bugfixes and code cleanups.

As the kernel module always depends on the Linux kernel it is compiled against, it does not make sense to provide binaries on our website. As usual, you will find the signed tarballs in our download section:

https://downloads.open-mesh.org/batman/releases/batman-adv-2018.4/

h2. Thanks

Thanks to all people sending in patches:

* Jonathan Haws <jhaws@sdl.usu.edu>
* Simon Wunderlich <sw@simonwunderlich.de>
* Sven Eckelmann <sven@narfation.org>

and to all those that supported us with good advice or rigorous testing:

* Andreas Ziegler <dev@andreas-ziegler.de>
* Gary Zou <guohuizou2000@sina.com>
* Linus Lüssing <linus.luessing@c0d3.blue>

h2. batman-adv

<pre>
$ git describe origin/master
v2018.3-12-ge6257fc2
$ range=v2018.3..v2018.3-12-ge6257fc2
$ git shortlog --email --no-merges "${range}"
$ git log --no-merges "${range}"|grep -e '\(Reported\|Tested\|Acked\|Reviewed-by\)-by'|sed 's/.*:/*/'|sort|uniq

new kernel support
==================


coding style cleanup/refactoring
================================


      batman-adv: Move OGM rebroadcast stats to orig_ifinfo

unclassified
============

      batman-adv: Enable LockLess TX for softif
      batman-adv: Disable MCAST during compilation
      batman-adv: Mark debugfs functionality as deprecated
      batman-adv: Provide debug messages as trace events

      batman-adv: Fix batadv_debugfs_deprecated line over 80 chars
      batman-adv: Fix colliding redefinition of file_dentry
      batman-adv: Fix colliding redefinition of skb_postpush_rcsum
      batman-adv: Use explicit tvlv padding for ELP packets



bugfixes
========





2018.4 (2018-11-06)
===================

* support latest kernels (3.16 - 4.20)
* coding style cleanups and refactoring
* disable multicast support by default for the out-of-tree Linux module
* improve tx performance by removing unnecessary locking
* deprecation of debugfs files
* support for debug message tracepoints
* explicit ELP padding to allow TVLVs in the future

</pre>

h2. batctl

<pre>
$ git describe origin/master
v2018.3-44-g2f5dbd0
$ range=v2018.3..v2018.3-44-g2f5dbd0
$ git shortlog --email --no-merges "${range}"
$ git log --no-merges "${range}"|grep -e '\(Reported\|Tested\|Acked\|Reviewed-by\)-by'|sed 's/.*:/*/'|sort|uniq

manpage
=======

      batctl: Fix minor typos in manpage

removal of outdated
===================

      batctl: Drop legacy vis_* related warning messages

cleanups/coderefactoring
========================

      batctl: Drop unused define SOCKET_PATH_FMT
      batctl: Use common code organization for statistics
      batctl: Move loglevel command to separate file
      batctl: Move log command to separate file
      batctl: Move gw_mode command to separate file
      batctl: Move routing_algo command to separate file
      batctl: Rename tp_meter to throughputmeter
      batctl: Introduce datastructure for subcommands
      batctl: Add per command flags
      batctl: Use command structure for remaining subcommands
      batctl: Use getopt to parse main options
      batctl: Store usage line next to command
      batctl: Prepare command infrastructure for shared functions
      batctl: Add type to command to structure usage output
      batctl: Convert debug table to command infrastructure
      batctl: Convert sysfs settings to command infrastructure
      batctl: Move backbonetable debug table to own file
      batctl: Move claimtable debug table to own file
      batctl: Move dat_cache debug table to own file
      batctl: Move gateways debug table to own file
      batctl: Move mcast_flags debug table to own file
      batctl: Move nc_nodes debug table to own file
      batctl: Move neighbors debug table to own file
      batctl: Move originators debug table to own file
      batctl: Move transglobal debug table to own file
      batctl: Move translocal debug table to own file
      batctl: Move aggregation setting to own file
      batctl: Move ap_isolation setting to own file
      batctl: Move bonding setting to own file
      batctl: Move bridge_loop_avoidance setting to own file
      batctl: Move distributed_arp_table setting to own file
      batctl: Move fragmentation setting to own file
      batctl: Move isolation_mark setting to own file
      batctl: Move multicast_mode setting to own file
      batctl: Move network_coding setting to own file
      batctl: Move orig_interval setting to own file
      batctl: Use external netlink socket for debug tables
      batctl: Move routing_algo specific code it command source file

new command
===========

      batctl: Add command to monitor for netlink events

infrastructure to disable commands
==================================

      batctl: Simplify enabling for bisect_iv subcommand
      batctl: Allow to enable/disable subcommands

2018.4 (2018-11-06)
===================

* coding style cleanups and refactoring
* correction of manpage spelling errors
* new subcommand "event" to receive netlink notifications
* infrastructure to disable commands during build time
* drop of the legacy vis subcommands 

</pre>

h2. alfred

<pre>
$ git describe origin/master
v2018.3-3-g5610d5b
$ range=v2018.3..v2018.3-3-g5610d5b
$ git shortlog --email --no-merges "${range}"
$ git log --no-merges "${range}"|grep -e '\(Reported\|Tested\|Acked\|Reviewed-by\)-by'|sed 's/.*:/*/'|sort|uniq


      alfred: Request MAC resolution for IPv4 address not in ARP cache
      alfred: Fix detection of own packets for IPv4 mode



2018.4 (2018-11-06)
===================

* bugs squashed:

  - fixed detection of own IPv4 packets
  - use manual ARP requests to detect 
</pre>


Happy routing,

The B.A.T.M.A.N. team