h1. Wbmv6-batmandev-agenda

h2. Celebration!

Find something to celebrate (something different from last year).

h2. Would be good if we do

* Big Compat Dump, consisting in integration of:
** TVLV
** FRAGv2
** CRC32 in TT
** Improve packet format design to avoid __packed (?)
** bandwidth meter packet format integration (? not sure if this does really hurt since bw meter uses icmp)

h2. Testing

* Catwoman (Throughput test)

h2. Concept discussion

* B.A.T.M.A.N. V (which includes bandwidth aware ELP and OGMv2)
* OGMv3 (no-tt OGM)
* Multicast (evolution) support inclusion
* "Howto to optimise the Bandwidth based GW selection":https://lists.open-mesh.org/mailman3/hyperkitty/list/b.a.t.m.a.n@lists.open-mesh.org/message/5FJF5RSSYJVX4R3TLCIZ2A3Z2BTXENHH/
* Multiple L3 border Gateways to the same network: how to choose the best one assuming each of them has a different (L3) cost to the destination
* Some notes were taken in the past about possible improvements to the GW feature. We may want to consider them:
<pre>- Multiple gw for multiple networks
Tag the GW so that you can choose the best among a single class and keep a
list of the best gws (one per class).
Each class can connect the mesh to a different network, therefore we would
want to communicate to several gw at the same time, not in mutual exclusion.</pre>
* mac80211 like DebugFS structure
* Fragmentation v2: advertise MTUs to avoid re-fragmentation?

h2. Talk

* Catwoman II (aka Fox)

h2. Others

* -GSOC 2013-
** -decide mentors availability-
** -think about possible projects-
* Maint release cycle (i.e. Stable versions)
* Compat code maintenance (split kernel-module and out-of-the-kernel package development?)