= Welcome to the B.A.T.M.A.N. development site =

This is the home of the B.A.T.M.A.N. development. To get some more general information about this project have a look at [http://open-mesh.org/batman/ http://open-mesh.org/batman/].
If you find any reproducible bug in our latest release candidate or in the development tree PLEASE add a new ticket. If you simply want to get the latest sources of all branches use:
[[br]]
svn co https://dev.open-mesh.org/svn/batman/


We are currently working on three different branches. Namely

 * our stable batman branch (the one currently operating in Berlin and Leipzig). It can be checked out with: [[br]] svn co https://dev.open-mesh.org/svn/batman/trunk/batman/

 * then, we have an experimental branch which implements some new/other algorithms and features referred to as batman-experimental and accessible via: [[br]] svn co https://dev.open-mesh.org/svn/batman/trunk/batman-experimental

 * to build batman advanced which also enables layer-two routing you need to checkout the complete trunk: [[br]] svn co https://dev.open-mesh.org/svn/batman/trunk/ [[br]] Then change to the batman-advanced folder and compile the sources


Have a lot of fun and remember:
[[BR]]
We are desperately waiting for your feedback! 
[[BR]]
...the B.A.T.M.A.N. team
[[BR]]
[[BR]]
[[BR]]






-------------------------------------------------------------------------
The remainder is temporary left for help...




trac is a '''minimalistic''' approach to '''web-based''' management of
'''software projects'''. Its goal is to simplify effective tracking and handling of software issues, enhancements and overall progress.

All aspects of Trac have been designed with the single goal to 
'''help developers write great software''' while '''staying out of the way'''
and imposing as little as possible on a team's established process and
culture.

As all Wiki pages, this page is editable, this means that you can
modify the contents of this page simply by using your
web-browser. Simply click on the "Edit this page" link at the bottom
of the page. WikiFormatting will give you a detailed description of
available Wiki formatting commands.

"[wiki:TracAdmin trac-admin] ''yourenvdir'' initenv" created
a new Trac environment, containing a default set of wiki pages and some sample
data. This newly created environment also contains 
[wiki:TracGuide documentation] to help you get started with your project.

You can use [wiki:TracAdmin trac-admin] to configure
[http://trac.edgewall.com/ Trac] to better fit your project, especially in
regard to ''components'', ''versions'' and ''milestones''. 


TracGuide is a good place to start.

Enjoy! [[BR]]
''The Trac Team''

== Starting Points ==

 * TracGuide --  Built-in Documentation
 * [http://projects.edgewall.com/trac/ The Trac project] -- Trac Open Source Project
 * [http://projects.edgewall.com/trac/wiki/TracFaq Trac FAQ] -- Frequently Asked Questions
 * TracSupport --  Trac Support

For a complete list of local wiki pages, see TitleIndex.

Trac is brought to you by [http://www.edgewall.com/ Edgewall Software],
providing professional Linux and software development services to clients
worldwide. Visit http://www.edgewall.com/ for more information.

